---
title: 'Reachability Deficits in Quantum Approximate Optimization of Graph Problems'
date: 2021-08-27
permalink: /posts/2021/08/27/Biamonte/
tags:
  - QAOA
  - performance analysis
  - graph problems
---

Summary: 
 
Use absolute error or fidelity as performance metrics

Details:
* the variational approach is as powerful as a general quantum computer. 

* However only restricted forms—which require significant classical resources in the optimization step—can currently be realized in practice.

* High depth variational circuits of fixed structure have been proven to represent universal resources for quantum computation [14,15]. However, higher depth circuits demand a significant optimization task to be performed on a classical computer.

* we propose graph density (ratio of graph edges to graph nodes) as an order parameter which correlates with the performance of QAOA. 

* density dependent performance (even in deeper circuits)

* deeper --> better performance

* density < 0.5 --> num of edges < 0.5 * num of nodes (sparse graph) 
 
* below densities of 0.5, QAOA shows the best performance independent of the number of nodes. 

* Beyond density 0.5, we find the performance to strongly depend on density for fixed number of nodes.

* sharp fall-off behaviour in performance beyond density 1.5.

from google's experiemntal paper: 3 classes of graphs considered. depth-3 circuit worked, higher had too much noise. till depth 5 tested:

1. hardware defined graph (edges fixed by chip connectivity)
2. k-regular graph: each node has degree k.
3. fully connected graph (SK model)

* performance metrics:
*  
1. error in energy relative error (energy obtanied/min energy expected)
2. success prob: fidelity
3. relative error (energy obtanied/min energy expected)

* better to use other metrics than relative error to study performance when density changes are involved


refs: 
QAOA proposed in: 11, 12
QAOA for discrete ptimization: 2, 9, 10
universality QAOA: 13, 14, 15
